Project teams, and what I really mean here is project teamwork.
None of us is as smart as all of us.
You will typically be leading a team of people,
and it's so important to have those leadership skills to lead your teams.
Now let's discuss and define project teams in the next slides,
and how you should select the people for those teams and assemble those teams.
What's a project team?
It's a group of people working for or with you on a project.
So when recruiting and building an effective team,
please consider the following.
The hard and soft skills of each person,
and we've talked about those hard and soft skills before,
we can use those as a checklist to help select the people we want for the team.
The attributes of each person, we've discussed those, such as integrity.
You may want to look at those attributes and see who
might make a good team member.
Also the critical roles and chemistry between people,
to make sure the team will work together.
This is also really important, one bad apple can ruin an entire team.
So a project team often includes people who usually don't work together,
maybe from different organizations.
May cross multiple geographies.
Especially in the corporate world, when you assemble a team,
typically there are people from a variety of organizations,
may be physically in different parts of the country or the world,
and who may not normally work together, except for this particular project.
So it may take some skills of yours to help assemble that right team.
Okay, let's go to the next slide.
Project team resources, or how your team may be staffed.
As a project manager, you may have resources that report to you.
Now some may formally work for you, you're their organizational boss,
you do their performance reviews, and you provide even monetary incentives.
Those team members may really work for you, in other words, hard for you.
Those are the ones that work directly for you.
There may also be people that work for another manager,
but are just assigned to you for this particular project.
And in that assignment, they may work full-time,
or maybe even just part-time for you.
So be prepared that your team will likely be a hybrid of
resources that some may work for you, some may work,
if you will, with you on the particular project.
Now this is very important to understand,
since you'll be applying resources, hours of effort,
for each task on your plan.
You will need to know that amount of time or hours
that each team member can contribute.
Maybe a member can only contribute 32 hours a week,
and you need to understand their capabilities to know
how much they can actually produce, and contribute to the project.
Now if they don't directly work for you,
I can guarantee, their time commitments may vary.
Now let's talk about a phenomenon I call,
people work for the people they work for.
Didn't quite get that?
Let's talk to that on the next slide.
Who reports to whom?
Each person works for the person they work for.
Yes, that sounds simple, even silly, but it is not.
That will always be where their allegiance is placed, so be aware of it.
If they don't directly work for you, as their supervisor,
then just be aware of where their loyalties lie,
and how much time you may be able to secure from them on a project.
So those loyalty drivers typically are performance evaluations and money.
So if possible, always ask for dedicated resources,
or at least, a dedicated minimum amount of time.
For example, I'm going to get Joe on this project from another department,
can I secure 20 hours a week and be guaranteed that?
Always push for those guarantees with that other person's manager.
Don't just assume they're going to help you for a certain amount of time.
Lastly, it's like herding kittens sometimes,
you may have heard of that phrase,
and trying to collect up these people who really don't work for you
and have allegiances elsewhere may be a challenge.
Sometimes you need to bring it up with the team member's manager,
maybe you have to bring these issues up possibly with a stakeholder,
or a steering committee, to make sure that those resources are aligned,
because your project will not be successful if you don't
have those resources that you're expecting,
and that you've allocated on your project.
Okay, so what kind of person do you want on your team?
Let's find out on the next slide.
Team member characteristics.
I'm going to give you a list of characteristics for thumbs down, and thumbs up.
Thumbs down, these are the people I probably would not want on my project.
And then the characteristics for thumbs up will those
characteristics I do want in people on my projects.
Okay,
here are the thumbs down ones to be aware of when you're assembling your team.
Sometimes people always like to break the rules, I don't like that.
Some people aren't always a team player.
Now here we are on a team, and they're off on their own, not good.
Prefers tech over people.
Yes, we do need technical people, but if the particular activity,
or role, or task that I'm having them do is more soft skill related,
then I need them to perform in that role,
not kind of drill down in the technical side,
and lose sight of the actual task that we're trying to get done.
Not schedule driven.
A lot of people are not schedule driven,
that's a real challenge,
I need people that always keep an eye on dates and
milestones and try to meet those.
Some people do not like to write or document things.
This is a really biggie for me.
As a project manager you need to do a lot of writing,
and a lot of communicating, and you need to be able to write clearly,
so different types of people and different types of
stakeholders can understand what you're saying,
know what your team's saying.
Some people avoid ownership, some people do not want to lead,
they just want to follow, and as a project leader,
a project manager, you're going to have project team members,
and all of those should be little project leaders in their own right.
Self interests versus company interests.
I'm really into people who are trying to get the job done for the company,
and not make a name for themselves.
Okay, that's just a short list, I'm sure you can come up with a lot more.
Now on the thumbs up side, here are some characteristics that I really love,
and these are the people I hire, or want to join my team.
Positive attitude.
That's critical, we're going to need it,
because we're going to have some tough times ahead.
Highly motivated, always getting in there and trying to get the job done.
A moderate aptitude, in other words, I need smart people,
they don't need to be Einsteins,
but I need to have some bright people on the team,
certainly.
People oriented, we've talked about people orientation, very, very important.
Attention to detail.
It's the little details that might come back and bite you on a project.
Process oriented.
We really need to rely on the processes that we're going to lay
down in this course to really get the job done.
And, last on the list here is, of course, a good communicator.
So, you as a leader of course are required to be a good communicator,
but I would also like to have my team members be good at communicating,
at least amongst themselves as team members,
and also with their particular customers or users that they're responsible for.
Now let's turn our attention to the challenges of a project manager, and how to avoid pitfalls on your projects.